---
title: Volume 2 — The Process of Circulation of Capital
author: readingcapital.github.io
layout: page
---

## Part One: [The Metamorphoses of Capital and their Circuit](chapter-01-04-reading-aid) ##

### Chapter 1: The Circuit of Money Capital ###

#### 1. First Stage. M-C ####

#### 2. Second Stage. The Function of Productive Capital ####

#### 3. Third Stage. C'-M' ####

#### 4. The Circuit as a Whole ####

### Chapter 2: The Circuit of Productive Capital ###

#### 1. Simple Reproduction ####

#### 2. Accumulation and Reproduction on an Expanded Scale ####

#### 3. Accumulation of Money ####

#### 4. The Reserve Fund ####

### Chapter 3: The Circuit of Commodity Capital ###

### Chapter 4: The Three Figures of the Circuit ###

#### (Natural Economy, Money Economy and Credit Economy) ####

#### (The Matching of Demand and Supply) ####

### Chapter 5: Circulation Time ###

### Chapter 6: The Costs of Circulation ###

#### 1. Pure Circulation Costs ####

##### (a) Buying and Selling Time #####

##### (b) Book-keeping #####

##### (c) Money #####

#### 2. Costs o f Storage ####

##### (a) Stock Formation in General #####

##### (b) The Commodity Stock Proper #####

#### 3. Transport Costs ####

## Part Two: The Turnover of Capital ##

The following terms are defined below. They are collected here as a quick
reference:

 * *turnover time* also called: turnover period = production time + circulation
   time (Chapter 7)
 * *circulation time*: selling time + time of purchase (Chapter 14)
 * *cycle of turnovers*: number of turnovers needed for all capital components
   to be reproduced (Chapter 9)
 * *overall turnover*: average of turnovers of all capital parts (Chapter 9)

### Chapter 7: Turnover Time and Number of Turnovers ###

Capital must pass through production time and circulation time. To realise the
purpose of perpetual valorisation the advance must return in order to go through
the circuit again.

Whilst parts of capital are in different phases of the circuit the identity of
capital is expressed ideally in money of account. *Turnover* expresses the
periodical return of capital to its point of departure.

> 236:4 For the capitalist, the turnover time of his capital is the time for
> which he has to advance his capital in order for this to be valorized and for
> him to receive it back in its original shape.

The emphasis here is on "in its original shape", i.e. the time it takes capital
in money form (resp. in form of productive capital, commodity capital is not a
form of advanced capital) to return to money form.

*Turnover time* measures the time of such a period, it is the sum of production
time and circulation time. The *number of turnovers* compares the turnover of
various capitals, where — conventionally, due to agriculture — the turnover time
of each individual capital is related to a year.

Turnover is a new determination of efficiency. The faster the turnover the
faster capital returns to its original shape with a surplus, i.e. the faster it
valorised. While in Chapter 5 the standpoint was that circulation time is a
limit for production time, the new standpoint is that turnover time overall
ought to be shortened.

### Chapter 8: Fixed Capital and Circulating Capital ###

#### 1. The Formal Distinctions ####

The starting point for this chapter is that different parts of productive
capital have different turnover times. This leads to the introduction of the
concepts of circulating and of fixed capital.

Circulating or fluid capital: the value of those means of production that is
fully transferred to a new commodity and hence ceases to exist materially after
this transfer. The same for labour power: a value equivalent of the labour power
consumed during production is part of the commodity created and can hence
circulate on.

Fixed capital on the other hand consists of means of labour such as machinery
that transfer part of their value to newly created products but remain
materially in the production process (until finally used up). Fixed capital is
any means of labour that circulates slower than circulating capital.

The difference between fixed and circulating capital is hence related to the
use-value side of production: some means of production are completely consumed
in the production of a single product, while others continue to function for
longer. But fixed capital has nothing to do with it being immobile (that's a
mistake bourgeois economists made). The decisive point is how this part of
capital circulates.

> 240:0 This particular manner of circulation arises from the particular way in
> which the means of labour gives up its value to the product, or acts to form
> value during the production process. This in turn arises from the special way
> in which the means of labour function in the labour process.

Only in this regard, use-value plays a role: the way in which it allows its
value to be transferred. Hence, fixed/circulating capital is about how value is
giving up or transferred to the product, whereas constant/variable capital is
about how value is formed.

Circulating capital embodied in the commodity gets thrown onto the market, sold,
and thereby its initial value is returned in form of money capital, providing
means to buy new circulating capital in form of means of labour and
labour-power. Fixed capital, however, only returns partially. During its
lifespan the value of the fixed capital in the form of the machine decreases
accordingly – while the amount of fixed capital in money form increases. All
things being equal, the money fund for buying a new machine must be filled after
the old one has served fully. Then, a new version of it needs to be bought – the
money is spent all at once. Fixed capital is an upper limit on turnover, as it
needs longest – fluid capital has turned over several times before fixed capital
does it once. In terms of advance both forms are equal, but the way reflux works
makes a difference: fixed capital withdraws a big value from the commodity
market at once, whereas circulating capital only takes smaller parts of value,
but more often.

#### 2. Components, Replacement, Repairs and Accumulation of the Fixed Capital ####

It is a repair or replacement, if some part of a machine does not work any
longer and is replaced. It is expansion, if production is enlarged (extensively)
or machines are made more efficient (intensively). Neither is driven by $m$ even
though it is expansion, but is paid for by a money hoard formed by returned
value parts of fixed capital.

### Chapter 9: The Overall Turnover of the Capital Advanced. Turnover Cycles ###

Fixed and fluid capital parts of capital turn over differently.  Furthermore,
different parts of fixed capital have different turnover times.

1. Capital is one sum of value that continuously produces its own surplus.
   However, in its material form (as means of production) this identity is not
   expressed. To express this identity the average turnover time of its
   components is taken to express the *overall turnover* of capital.

   > 262:2 The overall turnover of the capital advanced is the average turnover
   > of its different component parts.

   Note that this is different from the turnover of capital which is the sum of
   production time and circulation time, i.e. the turnover time of fluid
   capital.

2. However, there are not only differences in turnover time but also in how the
   various parts turnover. Fluid capital parts have to be replaced continuously.
   Some parts of fixed capital can be replaced or repaired at shorter intervals.
   Other parts of fixed capital can only be replaced once they have transferred
   all their value to the product. Those different forms of replacement do
   affect material reproduction but they do not affect the reproduction time of
   the values involved.

   > 262:5 It is necessary therefore to reduce the separate turnovers of the
   > various parts of the fixed capital to a similar form of turnover, so that
   > these differ only quantitatively, in the duration of their turnover.

3. The total value that turns over during a year might be larger than the total
   value advanced, even if a large part is advanced in fixed capital which takes
   many years to turn over. Say, a capital splits into £80 fixed capital which
   takes 10 years to turn over, and £20 which turn over 5 times a year. After a
   year 5·£20 + £8 turned over which is more than the initially advanced £100.

4. The *value turnover* of capital is the time it takes for the initially
   advanced sum to turn over once and it is separate from the actual
   reproduction time of capital's components.

   A capital that turns over 5 times a year has a value turnover of 5 times its
   original size in a year, but it is still the same capital. Its size is not
   affected by turnover time (ignoring surplus-value for now). But the continuous
   return of fluid capital into its originally advanced form — money —
   allows capital to continuously produce value and surplus-value even though its
   material components are not yet reproduced.

   If fixed capital needs 10 years to be reproduced then the production process
   must continue — the advanced capital has to describe a *cycle of turnovers* —
   until the fixed capital components are reproduced/turned over. Only after 10
   years, in this example, all components of capital turned over, i.e. in its
   originally advanced form.

   With the capitalist mode of production fixed capital grows relatively to
   fluid capital and overall turnover time increases.  On the other hand, the
   development of the capitalist mode of production shortens overall turnover
   time due to moral depreciation. The result is an estimated (by Marx) overall
   turnover time of 10 years.

   The separation of the actual reproduction of the fixed components of capital
   and continuous turnover of fluid capital which realises value components of
   fixed capital is the material basis for the business cycle — stagnation,
   moderate activity, overexcitement, crisis. Fixed capital is purchased once
   and then continuously transferred to the final product which then is
   continuously sold. Capitals hence sell without buying for long periods, and
   buy fixed capital seldomly and suddenly; but from Volume 1, Chapter 3 we know
   that the abstract possibility of crisis is the possibility of separating sale
   and purchase which yet belong together.  Coming out of a crisis capitals
   invest in fixed capital which leads to a synchronisation of investments which
   creates a lot of demand which then lessens.

### Chapter 10: Theories of Fixed and Circulating Capital. The Physiocrats and Adam Smith ###

This section was intentionally left blank.

### Chapter 11: Theories of Fixed and Circulating Capital. Ricardo ###

This section was intentionally left blank.

### Chapter 12: The Working Period ###

A working period is the total working time which is needed to produce a certain
product, i.e. the total number of labour hours.  It is the only time where value
is produced and where exploitation takes place.  The longer the working time,
the more disastrous the consequences of an unsuccessful commodity, as more value
was produced in vain.

*Discrete product*: the whole working period is short (say, a day or a
week).

*Continuous product*: it takes a long time to finish a product (extreme version:
building a ship).

For the production of discrete products, less circulating capital must be
available as selling of already finished products provides returning capital to
keep the production of more stuff going.  If the continuous product is sold, a
big chunk of capital including surplus-value returns at once.  The practical
consequence is especially relevant for capital-intensive and continuous
products: if the process of production is halted or stopped completely, all the
labour done so far counts nil.  Faster machines help by speeding up the process
of (continuous) production, thereby relatively more fixed capital is applied. It
also means more bound capital, which is a burden in a crisis.

Historically, huge continuous products could only be produced after accumulation
of capital in society reached a point where a company could actually gather
enough money capital.  Building railways was vastly supported by the
state. Credit addresses that problem.

The working period, on the one hand, is the one where valorisation happens – so
for valorisation a long working period is great (cf. Volume 1). In this second
volume though with standpoint of continuity having been established, turnover in
itself counts – and for that, each single period comes under attack and should
be shortened or as short as possibly possible.

### Chapter 13: Production Time ###

*Production time* is the sum of the working period and the time during which
natural laws run their course without human intervention. In that latter period
no value is created. Examples are plants that need to grow, wine that needs to
ferment, etc. Capital attempts to shorten production time. This usually entails
additional expenditures in fixed capital which increases the overall
turnover. Furthermore, these attempts have their limit in natural conditions,
e.g. in agriculture. To produce a regularity of production and circulation stock
is maintained such that part of the products can be sold while other products
still come into being.

### Chapter 14: Circulation Time ###

*Circulation time* is split into selling time and time of purchase (and
 transaction time).

*Selling time* is the time it takes to sell a commodity.  This time fluctuates,
but there are circumstances which determine it beyond such fluctuations, such as
distance to markets. Improvements in communication and transportation technology
allow to decrease selling time. These tend to affect different capitals in
different ways, so the ratios of their selling times might vary.  These improved
transportation and communication routes and hubs lead to concentration of people
and capital in one place.  Improved communication and transportation also
implies production for the world market as these new improved means must be
used.

The *time of purchase* is the time in which capital is in money form and seeks
to transform itself into productive capital. Here too distance to markets and
delivery times determine circulation time. Another factor is that sometimes
commodities can only be bought on specific dates, which lengthens time of
purchase.

In addition to selling time and time of purchase there is also *transaction
time*, i.e. the time it takes money to travel.  For example, it takes to process
a bank transfer.

Both with respect to buying and selling the moment of payment is crucial for
turnover time. This is a basis for the credit system. The seller wants money
when she sends her commodities off, the buyer wants to pay when the commodities
arrive. The time between the two can be bridged by credit.

### Chapter 15: Effect of Circulation Time on the Magnitude of the Capital Advanced ###

Circulation time influences the valorisation of capital negatively. Continuity
now counts, so during circulation time additional capital takes the place of
that capital now in stuck in the circulation sphere to keep production going. In
order to ensure continuity of capital's valorisation additional capital is
necessary which mostly lies idle.  The size of this additional capital is
determined by the relation of the length of the circulating time to the turnover
time.  With additional capital, circulation time appears to be zero and
production is continuous.

#### 1.-3. Working Period and Circulation Period Equal, Longer than, Shorter than ####

How the two periods (working/circulation period) and their length relate to each
other and how that effects the tying-up of capital in form of money capital.
They are rarely identical in length and when they are not, continuity of the
working period demands for additional circulating capital to be available as
money capital.

#### 4. Results ####

As a result of turnover, whose measure of valorisation dictates the speed of
value reproduction, lots of additional money capital is necessary on a social
level for the continuity of the working period. That is, capital set free is
necessary for the continuity. This working process is objectified in machinery,
and

> 356:4 Continuity is itself a productive force of labour.

A longer circulation time leads to pressure on the money market. The need for
more money capital and money at the same time having to lie idle, is one drive
for a credit system: need for money capital and the need for it to be used as
such – even in simple reproduction.

#### 5. Effect of Changes in Price ####

Changes of price lead to more capital being set free – or to more capital being
bound and thereby affect capital advance, the amount of capital available as
money capital and thereby the speed of turnover.

### Chapter 16: The Turnover of Variable Capital ###

#### 1 . The Annual Rate of Surplus-Value ####

Additional capital is required to keep production going continuously. Part of
capital is idle, but the turnover is related to all circulating capital
advanced, not only that which is active. In this chapter we ignore constant
capital as we are dealing with the effect of the turnover on surplus-value,
which is created by variable capital. A faster turnover realises that the same
advance in variable capital sets a bigger amount of labour in motion because
less capital is idle. This gives rise to the introduction of the annual rate of
surplus value:

$\frac{\mbox{mass of surplus-value produced during a turnover period}}{\mbox{variable capital applied during a turnover period}} \times \mbox{ turnover time of v}$

The more often $v$ turns over, the more often it can produce $m$, and the
efficiency of the advance in $v$ to bring that production of $m$ about is
measured in the annual rate of surplus-value.  The rate of surplus-value is not
related to a specific period: it applies to one hour just as much as to one day
or year.  The annual rate of surplus-value is related to a year and measures the
efficiency of capital to exploit labour.

This does not mean that surplus-value now has a source outside of the
exploitation of labour: if a capital turns over faster then less variable
capital is idle and the ratio of advanced variable capital to actually employed
variable capital decreases: more of the variable capital is actually employed.

#### 2. The Turnover of an Individual Variable Capital ####

Individual capital has to advance less capital to set the same amount of labour
into motion if turnover decreases. If variable capital turns over in 5 weeks,
capital can pay the wages of its workers after five weeks from the proceeds of
the previous turnover.  This is different if turnover is 1 year: in week 6
capital has to pay wages from initially advanced capital. Its workers might have
produced value in the first 5 weeks this value does not have the right
value-form yet, though: it is at most commodity, but not money yet.

#### 3 . The Turnover of Variable Capital Considered from the Social Point of View ####

In week one a Capital A and a Capital B advance money which their workers use to
buy food. Say Capital A turns over in a week. Then the money it throws into
circulation to hire its workers in week 2 is the equivalent of a value product
it produced and sold. If Capital B turns over slower, it also throws money into
circulation but without throwing a commodity equivalent into circulation at the
same time.

If the turnover is long there are periods where there is a surplus of money
entering circulation compared with commodities entering circulation.

### Chapter 17: [The Circulation of Surplus-Value](chapter-17-commentary) ###

Differences in turnover produce a difference in the annual rate of
surplus-value, although the absolute mass of surplus value remains the same.
This result is correct if surplus-value is not accumulated; if accumulation
takes place then the mass of surplus-value is dependent on the circulation of
surplus-value. The speed and success of circulation of surplus-value is hence a
limit for capital's accumulation.

Faster turnover means

1. less expenditure for means of subsistence of the capitalist.

2. already realised surplus-value can be used for additional outlays in fixed
   capital.  Part of the originally advanced capital can be capitalised
   surplus-value, if it is covered by already realised surplus-value.

3. reproduction on an extended scale by reinvesting surplus-value when
   incremental small improvements are possible.

However, there will always be period when money is hoarded in order for it to be
turned into money capital later. This hoard can be accumulated by either selling
to a money producer directly (overall money in society increases) or by
withdrawing money from circulation by selling without buying.

How do the two forms of capitalist reproduction — simple reproduction and
accumulation — affect the realisation of surplus-value?

#### 1. Simple Reproduction ####

The amount of money necessary to realise the commodities in circulation is
determined by the laws of simple commodity production (Volume 1, Chapter
3). This result is not altered by the value composition of commodities,
i.e. that they contain surplus-value.

From the standpoint of a capitalist there appears to be a problem, though. She
constantly throws less money into circulation than she withdraws and asks:
"Where does the money come from to realise surplus-value?" The problem, however,
is not where does the money come from to circulate surplus-value, but in general
where does the money come from to circulate commodities.  In our case, it is the
capitalists themselves who provide this money when they — in addition to
advancing capital — spend money on means of subsistence and luxury items.

#### 2. Accumulation and Expanded Reproduction ####

This general result is not affected if production is expanded in the first
instance.  The capitalist already owns the money now to be invested in
additional productive capital.  That money now circulates as money capital
instead of as revenue, i.e. it changes its form, but it already exists.

Furthermore, the value reproduced by expanded reproduction — additional variable
and constant capital — can be realised with the money initially advanced, it has
the same value.  However, the increased capital also produced an increases
surplus-value, where does the money come from to realise it?

To some extend increased velocity of circulation of circulation can replace
additional money, otherwise additional money must be produced. This limits the
capitalist mode of production's accumulation to the growth of money production;
a limit which is overcome by the credit system.

Yet, in absence of such a credit system, most extended reproduction requires
hoarding until sufficient funds are available. Where does this hoarded money
come from? If the hoard is accumulated by selling to money producers directly,
there is no problem, additional money is produced and hoarded.

However, if the hoard is accumulated by withdrawing money from circulation, this
presupposes that not all capitalists engage in hoarding at the same time. The
condition of accumulation is hence that the turnovers of capital interlock in
such a way, that selling without buying is matched by buying with selling,
i.e. some capitalists must expand their production while others hoard.

The realisation of surplus-value of one capitalist is dependent on the
realisation of surplus-value of other capitalists, those have to realise her
surplus-value.  Already in Volume 1 was discussed that for accumulation every
capitalist is dependent on other capitalists having earned the money to buy
their commodities.  This concerns the mass of value (enough surplus-value) and
value form (money). An additional consideration here is turnover: those other
capitalists might have produced surplus-value but might have realised it.  When
they go on and start purchasing is another question. The interlock of turnovers
on a social scale hence determines the reproduction and accumulation of capital.

## Part Three: The Reproduction and Circulation of the Total Social Capital ##

### Chapter 18: [Introduction](chapter-18-commentary) ###

The new object is developed: individual capital as part of total social capital.

### Chapter 19: Former Presentations of the Subject ###

This section was intentionally left blank.

### Chapter 20: Simple Reproduction ###

#### 1. Formulation of the Problem ####

> 469:2	"The immediate form in which the problem presents itself is this. How 
> is the capital consumed in production replaced in its value out of the annual product, and how is the movement of this replacement intertwined with the consumption of surplus-value by the capitalists and of wages by the workers?"

The question and the scheme to answer it are developed: commodity capital in each year must suffice to replace capital in value and material terms, otherwise there is no simple reproduction.

#### 2. The Two Departments of Social Production ####

The distinction between capitals based on what they produce is introduced. *department I* produces means of production for $c$ and *department II* produces means of subsistence for $v$ and $s$.

#### 3. Exchange Between the Two Departments: I(v+c) against IIc ####

First new law: constant capital of department II must equal the sum of the $v$ and $s$ components of department I: $I_{v +s} = II_c$.

#### 4. Exchange Within Department II. Necessary Means of Subsistence and Luxury Items ####

Second new law: the realisation of the value components $v$ and $s$ of department II must happen within that department. The class opposition which restricts workers to necessary means of subsistence necessitates a conceptual distinction of capitals which produce *ordinary means of subsistence (IIa)* and those which produce *luxury items (IIb)*. The consumption of luxury items by capitalists from department IIa is the condition for the reproduction of workers in department IIb. The realisation of surplus-value of department IIa is also determined by this relationship.

#### 5. The Mediation of t he Exchanges by Monetary Circulation ####

Rejections, relationships and a third law. Money returns to its origin: capitalists are paid with money they themselves throw into circulation (partially mediated by wage payments) either as an advance or as personal spending.

The reciprocal value realisation of the departments is dependent on money expenditures which happen before value realisation. Capitalists speculating on their success and their positive verdict about the course of business is a necessary condition for this success.

#### 6. The Constant Capital in Department I ####

No new problem for the material and value reproduction of constant capital of producers of means of production. Constant capital in department I is realised and reproduced within this department.

#### 7. Variable Capital and Surplus-Value in the Two Departments, 8. The Constant Capital in Both Departments, 9. A Look Back at Adam Smith, Storch and Ramsay ####

A riddle which concerned economists, a solution and critique of ideology. It can look like Smith had a point when he said all values decompose into revenue if you consider that $II_{c+v+s}$ can be considered as $I_{v+s} + II_{v+s}$ because $II_c = I_{v+s}$.

> 501:2 On the premise of simple reproduction, therefore, the total value of the means of consumption annually produced is equal to the annual value product, i.e. equal to the total value produced by the labour of the society in the course of the year, and the reason why this must be the case is that with simple reproduction this entire value is consumed.

However, this equality in magnitudes is not the same as the equivalence in substance. Both departments produce fresh value and the value of constant capital reappears in their products. Expressed for department I:

> 509:1 Socially considered, however, the portion of the social working day that produces means of production, both adding new value to them and transferring to them the value of the means of production consumed while they were being produced, produces nothing but new *constant capital*, destined to replace that consumed in the form of the old means of production, the constant capital consumed in both departments I and II.

#### 10. Capital and Revenue: Variable Capital and Wages ####

It is wrong to say that what is capital for one is revenue for another, as this (a) identifies the value of the product with the value product and (b) confuses what becomes of money after it left the circuit of capital with the function of value within the circuit.

A cause for potential frictions: while the working class lives hand to mouth, the capitalist class can indulge in luxury spending or save up. This might assert itself against the necessary relationship of exchanges between the departments.

#### 11. Replacement of the Fixed Capital ####

A fourth law: simple reproduction can only happen if department II wants to buy new machinery to the same extend as it hoards in order to buy fixed capital later. That is, for there to be a part of department II that only buys means of production without selling an equivalent in this year (section 1), there must be an equally big part of department II that sells without buying means of production (section 2).

Such a balance would have to exist in every year which is unlikely due to the anarchy of the market. If every year the same is produced in terms of value and material then this means crisis. Simple reproduction only exists under constant overproduction, i.e. expanded reproduction, which means accumulation must take place. This is the transition to the next chapter.

#### 12. The Reproduction of the Money Material ####

Money material is replaced and the possibility of hoarding without disturbing the reproduction process exists.

#### 13. Destutt de Tracy's Theory of Reproduction ####

> 563:2 [Destutt de Tracy held] that it is not the capitalists who are fed by the workers, but the workers by the capitalists, and moreover for the brilliant reason that the money with which the workers are paid does not remain in their hands, but always returns to the capitalists in payment for the goods that the workers produced.

### Chapter 21: Accumulation and Reproduction on an Expanded Scale ###

The general result of this chapter: accumulation presupposes accumulation.

* Capitals which hoard in order to expand in the future are dependent on
  capitals which are expanding now, i.e. those which already successfully
  hoarded.

* Accumulation in department I is dependent on accumulation in department II and
  vice versa. This way capitals produce the material and value conditions for
  accumulation.

* This accumulation includes simple reproduction.

* Means of subsistence producing capitals must expand in anticipation of
  expansion elsewhere and must produce commodity hoards which are only realised
  by workers yet to be hired by department I.

* The presentation of the circulation or the process of reproduction of capital
  not only shows how capital produces, but also how capital is produced.

* The laws developed in Chapters 20 and 21 present themselves as possibilities
  and limits (up to interruptions) of accumulation or even simple reproduction.

The drive to accumulation determines capitalist production. Capital makes simple
reproduction dependent on the success of accumulation. If an individual capital
is successful with this or not depends on if it fits into the unity of
production and circulation process of total social capital. A unity which is
re-produced by individual capitals — or not. Capital must fix this new criterion
for the capitalist purpose to the commodity, the link between production and
circulation. This is how the next volume starts.
